# NLP-Genius-Sentiment-Analysis
**By Niki Vasan and Rose Feng**

This repo contains the code used for my QTM 340 (Practical Approaches to Data Science with Text) final project at Emory University. In this class, we learned to analyze text data using various NLP models. This project involved analyzing song lyrics of the top albums from Billboard's Top 200 of 2020 list for both male and female artists. We ran a sentiment analysis using `NLTK`'s `VADER` sentiment analyzer to determine if top selling albums by female artists differ in sentiment from male artists. **Most of the code in this project was split between my partner and I, and is outlined in our project colab notebook linked [here](https://github.com/nikivasan/NLP-Genius-Sentiment-Analysis/blob/main/QTM_340_Final_Project_notebook.ipynb).** The motivation behind our project is summarized here: 

>*...our motivation for conducting this project is to observe what music streaming behavior can tell us about societal biases and preferences, particularly in younger audiences. As with every other industry, the music industry has created and imposed its own gendered norms of what kinds of music are best performed by women and men. We want to quantitatively determine if there is a difference in the sentimental qualities of popular music authored by women as compared to men. Do people prefer listening to women whose lyrics tend to hold a more positive or negative sentiment? How would such a phenomenon relate to the new socio-cultural shift towards rejecting stereotypically feminine qualities of sweetness and docility?*

As this is a class project, we don't claim for our project to provide definitive answers to the questions above. Rather, we viewed our work as a starting point for determining what kind of content sells when sung by a woman versus a man. The files in this repo include our [presentation slide deck](https://github.com/nikivasan/NLP-Genius-Sentiment-Analysis/blob/main/Final%20Project%20Presentation.pdf), [colab notebook](https://github.com/nikivasan/NLP-Genius-Sentiment-Analysis/blob/main/QTM_340_Final_Project_notebook.ipynb) and [data](https://github.com/nikivasan/NLP-Genius-Sentiment-Analysis/tree/main/data). 
